The way in which they look at the world, he goes on to say that fantasy is popular because
looking forward is too gloomy.
It's a depressing activity, whereas nostalgia is usually a thing that people like to do.
It would be interesting to see if you found that when you reviewed the fantasy field and
compared it with science fiction that fantasy does go backwards for its roots.
I tend to think it does.
By the way, the tape is running again, but one of the questions I was going to ask you
a little bit later too was if you ever intended to try some pure fantasy yourself.
I've written only one story that I would consider true fantasy, which is a parody or
an imitation of P.G. Woodhouse, in which I'm very fond of P.G. Woodhouse as a comedy writer,
as a humorous writer.
And I wrote a story called The Marriage of True Mind, in which I took his characters
and settings and wrote a fantasy.
Other than that, I don't see that I'm strongly drawn to fantasy.
Erasmus Darwin and the Erasmus Magistus stories are close to fantasy, and I don't think I
will get much closer than that.
It's not where my reading interests lie, and I would find that I cannot see quite how
I would avoid trying to explain things.
In writing The Salky with David Bischoff, one of the things I always found when we were
writing was that I have a very strong desire to explain what is happening and not be happy
to leave it as a supernatural event.
And the same thing was true in writing about Erasmus Darwin.
I think that would stop me writing fantasy.
I might start out thinking it was fantasy, but if I explained it in some logical or scientific
terms, then it's no longer fantasy.
Yeah, last week we talked to Damon Knight, and I talked about his latest novel, The World
in Thorin, and I called it a fantasy novel, and he stopped me immediately and asked me
why I said it was fantasy because it was obviously science fiction.
He provided the background in the book very subtly, and I just hadn't picked it out carefully
enough.
Well, there's also a category which I call science fantasy, in which the vocabulary
of science is used, but it's not used in any scientifically plausible way.
In other words, anybody can talk about the uncertainty principle and black holes, but
if what they then go on and do is scientific gibberish, it's using the trappings of science
which makes it sound like science fiction, but it's really fantasy, and you see lots
of that.
I don't know, I haven't read or even seen Damon Knight's book, so I can't tell whether
I would consider it science fantasy or science fiction, and they're quite different in my
mind.
Anyhow, you're a question of a few moments ago.
I would agree that probably fantasy does go backwards, and it's more of an escape, whereas
science fiction, you have to confront things, you have to look to the future, and some people,
I guess, maybe because of the state of the economy or something, prefer looking backwards
these days.
Yeah, I believe as a matter of fact, it's almost impossible to write science fiction
in a multiple book series, because the essence of science fiction to me is that you are constantly
moving to new things you haven't considered before.
If you can write a trilogy about something, you're probably writing fantasy, because you
don't have the constant spacing of true unknowns going on all the time through a trilogy.
You usually have a rather comfortable setting established against which the trilogy or more
books develop.
David here has just thought of a question on this topic he would like to ask you, Dr. Sheffield.
Brian.
Yes, you were talking about not really being comfortable with writing fantasy.
I'd wondered, Stephen King writes horror, but a lot of his horror fiction has science
fiction background to it, like Carrie Telekinesis, sort of science background.
I'd wondered if you'd ever considered writing horror.
Yeah, well, this book I mentioned that I wrote in collaboration with another Washington writer,
David Bischoff, is science fiction horror?
Is the closest thing we can come to describing it?
An alternative type of description would be science fiction Gothic, but it has explicitly
grew some things and it has some explicitly frightening things.
And the reviewers have been saying this is sort of Stephen King style.
So I found that a very interesting exercise.
And I quite like to read horror books, and I very much like to read Stephen King books.
So I'd be quite comfortable attempting that.
I think I would find it harder to write a Salem's lot type of book because he very much
is writing a real supernatural vampire book in that, whereas in The Stand, for example,
he is writing what I consider to be really science fiction.
And the dead zone is somewhere between the two.
I like that, but I felt it was somewhere between science fiction and realism and horror.
I don't know how to define that mixture.
Yeah, I thought The Stand was just a standard, although excellently written, post-holicoss book.
That's right.
It had overtones which are not explained as to how things happen, but it was science fiction,
as much as anything King has ever written, I think, is science fiction.
I have not read his latest collection of fauna vellas, though.
I haven't seen that yet.
I think that's again a horror belt.
Okay, let me change the direction for a second here.
Sometimes you write what I guess I would call sort of a message story, something like the
man who sold the moon or bounded it in the nutshell where you talk about space programming
and so forth.
The man who sold the moon, I thought, was beautiful satire, and I wondered if you had much reader
response about that one.
I think the zero is the way to put that.
It was very much influenced by a high-line story, The Man Who Sold the Moon, and it was preaching a bit.
I think that's an example where you said there was a message, and I said I was preaching,
but I haven't really had any response, and I'm not quite sure what response I would expect for that.
I think that most people who read it and approve of it are already upset at the way we seem to be
unable to have an effective space program, so the only sort of letters I might think I would get would be
people who would agree with it.
But I haven't had those either.
It really hasn't produced much reader reaction.
That series on Henry Carver that you've done, I read a little piece that you'd written where you called it a
sewage series, and I wondered why you called it that.
Well, because the two of the first three involved, let me put it differently.
The first one of all was one involving the Macinlink, which was not particularly loadsome in any way,
but then the next one was about one of the lawyers who was working in charge of the sewers on a space station.
That was Dinsdale Descent, and duly falls into the sewer.
Then another one, which is the Dalmatian of Spouse, the same individual again falls into a different sewer.
And generally speaking, I regard those stories as stories in which I take ideas that people have said are gross and unpleasant and
loathsome and disgusting and put them into stories.
One evening at dinner, we made a long list of things that people found generally distasteful, and the suggestion was I should just
write my way through the list until I got to the end.
And I find that that's all right to a limited extent if you're writing what you hope a humorous story is, like Parasite's Lost is about a truffle pig.
And the Demos Plague is another series in which a man has to safeguard two large pigs taking them out to Mars.
The stories generally are not intended to have any message, as you might say, the man who stole the moon has, or any redeeming features.
I just write them because I find them amusing.
It's very hard to tell whether readers find them amusing or not, though certain writers always quote those stories to me.
It's interesting.
For instance, Jerry Poineuil actually remembers verbatim, certain lines from Perfectly Safe, Nothing to Worry About, and always quotes them to me.
So it obviously strikes a chord somewhere, but I never consider those stories to be very popular.
I think that they're a rather odd sense of humor.
And some of the jokes don't work, by the way, as I found after I'd written the stories, because certain things are said in England that are not used in America.
For example, in England the word primate is used very commonly to mean either a member of the guerrilla chimpanzee or human family, and monkeys generally, or else it's used to mean a high official of the church.
Whereas I find in this country, although the word is permitted in both senses in the dictionary, almost no one uses it that way.
That's why I wrote a joke based around that, and to most readers I'm sure it just fell flat.
Well, we've enjoyed those stories a great deal.
In fact, I wanted to ask you if you had planned any more of them.
Well, I have one that's sitting there somewhat, I've got about eight pages, and I stopped and did other things.
A story called Space Opera, which involves the same characters, and what happens when this producer decides to stage a modern opera which has been written.
It's called Balaclava, and they decide to stage it in free fall with the charge of the light brigade and other complications.
But I haven't written the rest of it, because I've been too busy writing other things.
It's sitting there over on the desk there, and sometime I'll write it.
But I write those occasionally with no fixed time table, just when I feel like it.
Another one of your short stories, the one that was entitled Four Father Figure, you had an afterward to that where you said time travel into the past would be absolutely impossible.
And I've been reading a lot recently in my science magazines about physicists talking about time travel.
And I wonder why you thought it would be absolutely impossible.
Well, the magazine articles usually make use of certain properties of rotating black holes, or rotating massive cylinders in which there appears to be something peculiar going on on the time axis.
But as I mentioned in the afterward, the idea that a person can go back in time and do something which then leads to his own disappearance and his own never having existed seems to me a very severe logical problem.
If somebody can go back and essentially cause themselves never to have been there, then that's a disturbing situation.
The usual explanation as to what happens is that at that point, if you like, time moves off onto a different branch, almost like throwing the points on a railway line.
But the fact then is that you have not changed what the original timeline looked like.
It's a very confusing situation.
As people have said, our desire to have things causally related, cause and effect to be related, is a function of the way our brains operate and not necessarily the way that the universe operates.
But even given I'll admit that, but I still find it hard to see how you can explain this grandfather paradox, that I will use my time travel, go back and shoot my grandfather before my father was conceived.
At which point I will have ceased to exist.
On the other hand, I've only ceased to exist because I went back and shot my grandfather.
So it's an absolute paradox that you can't explain because if I didn't exist, I couldn't have shot him.
I just don't see a way out of that.
Okay, of course today there are a number of scientists like yourself who do write science fiction.
And I wonder, I guess you've sort of answered this or alluded to it a few times in the interview.
How do you find the time to write and still practice your profession as a scientist?
Well, I don't write as much as what my wife would call real writers write.
Full-time writers should be able to produce a lot more than I do.
One reason I produce as much as I do produce is because I enjoy it.
I consider it a form of pleasure and relaxation.
And so I do it for choice when I'm not doing other things.
But I feel that if I didn't have a job, I might write a lot more, but I would probably enjoy it a lot less.
And in terms of somebody who is prolific, I don't produce much at all.
If you look at the productivity of, well, I have to think of somebody who's prolific.
I suppose Andy Offit has written a couple of hundred books probably.
CJ Cherry produces, I think, probably three books a year.
Jack Chalker produces probably five books a year.
Silverberg, when he was writing full-time, produced Lord knows how many words a year.
One and a half million, two million, something like this.
In terms of productive people, I have a minute output.
Well, as a reader, I sort of lament that fact because I think you're one of the very best writers around.
And I would like to see you write a lot more if you had the time.
In fact, I feel guilty right now taking your writing time from you.
I appreciate the compliment, but I suspect that if I had more time, I wouldn't write that much more.
I would find other ways of doing things.
I probably, if I had half a day to write, in other words, if I worked half time at my job instead of full-time,
I would produce more, but I might saturate because it would seem to be enjoyable after doing it for a certain period each day.
The definition that people use of a real writer is somebody who has to write,
who will starve if they can't write and will write even if they have to starve.
I don't think that makes sense.
By those terms, I don't consider I'm a real writer at all because although I like to write,
it's not the top of my priority of things I want to do.
And the scientific work occupies a higher slot.
Maria Zimmer Bradley said that when she had to choose between a marriage and her writing or anything else in her writing,
her writing wins, but it's the most important thing in her life.
I just don't have that much attachment to it.
And I think the fact that I didn't write for so long, that I started for no particular reason after not writing for a long time,
may be one of the reasons I don't consider I'm a true writer.
I never felt the urge to write when I was young.
I never felt that fiction was something I had to do, but many writers have that and it dominates their lives.
Okay, I just have a few more here.
I'm sort of winding down.
Fine.
Are you involved today in conventions and fan communication and so forth?
Well, I always go to BaldyCon and I always go to Disclaves and I always go to Unicom and I always go to PhilCon.
They're all easy because they're all within 150 miles of fear.
I don't usually go to conventions that are more distant, largely because the amount of time they take.
I enjoy them very well, but it's a time-consuming activity and I run out of time.
I don't have enough time to do the things I like to do, but I do enjoy convention atmospheres and I like being on panels and I like talking to readers.
And I find it all very relaxing and enjoyable, but there's a limit to the amount that I can do.
For example, I probably will not get out to Worldcon, which is this weekend, because I have a deadline for a nonfiction piece of work that I feel I want to make.
If I were writing full-time, I might get to more conventions, but as it is, I have to be rather sparing in my going off and sitting in Con suite and drinking beer.
Besides the Book Earthwatch and its sequel, what kind of places take your nonfiction publications?
Well, I just had a lengthy article on remote sensing satellite systems in a thing called the Interdisciplinary Science Review,
which was rather amusing because the article before mine was an article by Arthur Clark on telecommunications for the Third World.
And he wrote me a note a couple of weeks ago and my article came straight after it.
He wrote me a little note that said, if you don't stop following me around like this, I'm going to call a top, which is a reference back to the fountains of paradise and the way between the worlds.
But that was a fairly long article.
I'm doing a book now, which is, we'll come out from William Morrow next year on Space Careers, which is How to Go About Getting Jobs in the Space Program.
And that's going to require a lot of time.
And it's a case where I couldn't afford to write that book if I didn't have a job with a writer and writing for a living.
I couldn't afford to write a book which is really non-commercial, but I'm doing it because I think it's an important book.
And that's one of the luxuries of having a job.
You can afford to write things that are intrinsically non-commercial.
I also have to write a paper by the end of the year, a general survey paper of satellite imaging systems for the Journal of the American Astronautical Society.
What I'm hoping to do there is to kill two birds with one stone and use the same paper as an image processing meeting in Paris in November.
I try to, just like writers, recycle their stories, use the plot twice.
I think I'm doing the same thing non-fictionally by making a paper and a talk come from a single written work.
If I remember correctly, your advanced degrees in theoretical physics, how does that relate to the satellite job that you do?
Does that come naturally from it?
Pretty much. What happened is I was solving problems in physics using computers and started to solve problems connected with orbit computation using the same mathematical methods or variations of them that I had been using already in physics.
That led me into orbit computation. It led me into NASA. That led me to be asked to take a look at the Earth Resources Program, which was just beginning, to see what computational requirements that would have.
And that led me on into the Earth Sensing Satellite Business.
So it's all connected in a rather peculiar but logical way. But there is a chain that you can connect from the physics to the present activity.
And it's been somewhat accidental. It's as usual in life. At certain times you meet people who then do other things and involve you in them.
I find that that happens quite a lot. It's like in writing. I find that I meet writers and before I know it, I'm writing things that I never expected to write just because I met them.
And later on they come back and tell me they're doing a particular anthology or something. And before I know it, I'm committed to doing a story.
The same sort of thing happens in the scientific work, that you build up a chain of acquaintances that somewhat dictates what you'll do next.
Okay, I would assume, I would almost be certain of this, that you are an optimistic person in regard to man's future, his use of his technology and his capacity to save the Earth from destruction. Would that be correct?
Generally speaking, so, I think everybody is almost. I ran a panel a couple of months ago in which I asked every science fiction panelist if they were essentially optimistic that we would be able to solve our problems.
And when you got down to it, they all said yes. I feel the same because I don't think the alternative is productive. In other words, if you say no, then you're led to conclude you may as well give up.
If you say yes, then you look for methods for solving the problem. You look for mechanisms as to how to do it.
That's much better to me than sitting around and assuming that we're going to die in pollution and overpopulation. I certainly convinced that we have problems ahead in the next century.
But I'm also convinced that we will have solutions available through our technology and we just have to be ready to apply them. We do have to have an active program for exploring off the Earth because most of the resources available to us happen to be off Earth.
The energy and material resources of the solar system are much more abundant than we can get by harnessing what power we have or what minerals we have down here.
So we have to do things we're not doing now. But given that framework, I'm optimistic. I'm optimistic about most things, I think.
I don't consider, for example, I could be a generally pessimistic writer. There are some writers I find have a very consistent down tone to their writing, a depressing tone.
And I find that I don't like to read that and I don't think that I would like to write it and I think the reason I don't like to read it or write it is because inside I'm optimistic about things.
Okay, excellent. I'm down to two more now. Could you just briefly tell me, your president still, I assume, of the American Astronautical Society?
No, I'm not. I'm now the past president and I'm on the board of directors. But I serve my time. You are only allowed to serve for a limited period.
So I serve my time and I'm still on the executive committee, which is the central group that runs the society along with the board of directors.
And I'm still on the board of directors and I'm still active in it. I was out there last Friday arranging for the Houston meeting, which comes up in October, and the Goddard Memorial Symposium next spring.
Okay, my question was going to be, though, just I'm not familiar with that, what like what the purpose of it is and what it does.
The society, in a broad sense, the objective of the American Astronautical Society is to promote the space program and in particular the American Space Program and to work on its behalf and argue to the public, to Congress, to anyone else, that it's a good thing to have.
It's a society that has picked its members somewhat carefully, I feel. For example, on the board of directors of the society, James Beggs, who is the president and national administrator, is a director.
Harrison Schmidt, who is the astronaut and the senator from New Mexico, and head of the Senate Space Activities is on the board of directors.
Ron Flipper, who's the head of the Space Application Subcommittee on the House side, is one of the directors. Don Pucway, who is the head of the Science Technology Committee, is on the board.
We have a lot of people who are vice presidents or presidents of aerospace activities.
It's a group of people who believe that the space program is important because of the way in which it relates to the country's overall science and technology development.
I happen to regard the technology of the country at the moment as somewhat in the doldrums. I think that U.S. technology and U.S. science has taken a licking over the past few years, but I feel that it is important to the economy.
I think if you're technology groups, you have recessions and your economy goes downhill, I feel that the space program is a very good stimulant for that economy, as well as holding out these longer-term potentials for solving really bad problems at the end of this century and early in the next century.
The AAS, the American Astronautical Society, generally has these goals, which is in favor of science, in favor of technology, and promoting where possible. I don't mean lobbying because we don't lobby, but promoting the space program through technical activities, through technical meetings, and science fairs, and those types of things.
Okay, my last question would, you've sort of alluded to these things scattered throughout the interview, but could you draw together for me the things you're writing on now and your future plans for fiction?
Right. Well, what I'm writing right now is the book called Man on Earth, which is about artificial Earth-sensing satellites, and there's more pictures and text describing what man is doing to the Earth, and on the Earth.
Cities, dams, land reclamation, this type of thing. That will be finished by the middle of October, and will come out next spring.
Okay. Then I'm writing a book on space careers with a lady called Carol Rosen, who has worked a lot on space movement activities. That will be finished in February, and will probably come out about the middle of next year.
And I'm writing a book called The McCandrew Chronicles, which is really more of what I'm writing, the last story of a series of stories, most of which have already been published in Analog or Galaxy, about a physicist called McCandrew.
That I expect to be out again next spring. And when those are finished, I can get back to something that I started and got about 60 pages done, and then other things intruded.
It's a hard science fiction novel called Between the Strokes of Night, which is quite ambitious in terms of the scale that it takes place on.
It begins about 1990, and it goes out to about 26,000 AD. But it does so through a peculiar technique in which I have different groups of people who live at different subjective rates.
In other words, they discover techniques in which you can remain alert, but you subjectively, time passes very, very slowly.
And in order for that to be done, it's necessary that people must live in a low-gravity environment, because otherwise they cannot react quickly enough to external stimuli.
They keep those fall over before they knew it. And that novel, which it will be, will probably occupy me most of next year when I've got these other things done.
And I will keep on writing short stories, I suppose, just as fast as I can, but I never know quite when I'll write one of those.
I'll probably write a story for an anthology that Susan Schwartz is going to do called Habitat. But I haven't started to sit down and write it.
Well, you can... I hope you'll accept a request from me to do some more Erasmus Magister stories.
I'll do my best, yes. It's interesting. One of the things I have to do is find out how people react to those generally.
I don't know yet, but I'm glad to hear that you like them. That's a good sign.
Okay, listen, before we shut this down, is there anything you have by way of crusades or pet peeves or anything you'd like to say or get on the air?
No, I don't think so. I think I'm generally, as you said earlier, optimistic and I'm not particularly grieved with most things around me.
I have things I don't like, but I like to work for the causes I approve of and against the causes I disapprove of.
One of the things that I've noticed is that it's more effective to go and do things for causes you like or against causes you dislike and talk about your likes and dislikes.
So put me down as a generally relatively cheerful person. I don't have a large number of pet peeves and I don't have any real chips on my shoulder.
I have a lot of my friends at the moment who are very upset about the publishing business, for instance.
I consider it to be chaotically organized, but I think that will take care of itself. That's just evolution at work.
Okay, Dr. Sheffield, you've been very gracious to us giving us this much time. I understand how busy you are and we really appreciate it.
Well, I hope you get something usable.
We will. What we will do now, we have a lead time of about oh six to eight weeks before these get on the air.
So when we've got them edited, we will send you copies.
Okay.
And if I can find out the, we don't know exactly what stations will have us in the fall, but when I find out, if you're interested, I can send you a list of those in case there's one in your area.
Yeah, I would be interested.
Okay, we will look forward to your future work and we thank you very much for your time.
Okay, thank you and I'll go and write something.
Okay.
I've got my Apple computer on over in the corner, but I,
All right, Apple computer, all right.
Okay, thank you, sir.
Bye.